# What Is JavaScript?

- His name was a marketing ploy to try to position this language as a palatable alternative to writing the heavier and more well-known Java of the day.
- The oficial name specified by TC39 \***\* and formalized by the ECMA standards body is **ECMAScript 2019 | ES2019.\*\*
- The JavaScript/JS that runs on your browser or in Node.js, is an implementation of the ES2019 standard.
- The TC39 are the technical steering committee (conformed by between 50 and 100 different persons) that manages JS and their primary task is managing the official specification for the language.
- The developer console (on the Developer Tools) is not trying to pretend to be a JS compiler that handles your entered code exactly the same way the JS engine handles a .js file. It’s trying to make it easier to quickly enter a few lines of code and see the results immediately. These are entirely different use cases, and as such, it’s unreasonable to expect one tool to handle both equally.
- The term “paradigm” in programming language context refers to a broad (almost universal) mindset and approach to structuring code.
- Typical paradigm-level code categories include procedural, object-oriented (OO/classes), and functional (FP):
  - Procedural style organizes code in a top-down, linear progression through a pre-determined set of operations, usually collected together in related units called procedures.
  - OO style organizes code by collecting logic and data together into units called classes.
  - FP style organizes code into functions (pure computations as opposed to procedures), and the adaptations of those functions as values.
- Many languages also support code patterns that can come from, and even mix and match from, different paradigms. So called “multi-paradigm languages” offer ultimate flexibility.
- JavaScript is a multi-paradigm language. You can write procedural, class-oriented, or FP-style code, and you can make those decisions on a line-by-line basis instead of being forced into an all-or-nothing choice.

## Backwards & Forwards

- Backwards compatibility means that once something is accepted as valid JS, there will not be a future change to the language that causes that code to become invalid JS. Code written in 1995—however primitive or limited it may have been!—should still work today. There are some small exceptions to this rule. JS has had some backwards-incompatible changes, but TC39 is extremely cautious in doing so.
- Forwards-compatible means that including a new addition to the language in a program would not cause that program to break if it were run in an older JS engine. **JS is not forwards-compatible.**

  - If the feature is a new syntax, the program will in general completely fail to compile and run, usually throwing a syntax error. If the feature is an API (such as ES6’s [Object.is](http://object.is/)(..)), the program may run up to a point but then throw a runtime exception and stop once it encounters the reference to the unknown API.
  - For new and incompatible syntax, the solution is transpiling. Transpiling is a contrived and community-invented term to describe using a tool to convert the source code of a program from one form to another (but still as textual source code). Typically, forwards-compatibility problems related to syntax are solved by using a transpiler (the most common one being Babel ([https://babeljs.io](https://babeljs.io/))) to convert from that newer JS syntax version to an equivalent older syntax.

    ```jsx
    // old snipped code
    if (something) {
      let x = 3;
      console.log(x);
    } else {
      let x = 4;
      console.log(x);
    }

    // babel transpile code
    var x$0, x$1;

    if (something) {
      x$0 = 3;
      console.log(x$0);
    } else {
      x$1 = 4;
      console.log(x$1);
    }
    ```

  - If the forwards-compatibility issue is not related to new syntax, but rather to a missing API method that was only recently added, the most common solution is to provide a definition for that missing API method that stands in and acts as if the older environment had already had it natively defined. This pattern is called a polyfill (aka “shim”).

    ```jsx
    /*
    	The following code uses an ES2019 feature, the finally(..) method on the promise prototype.
    	If this code were used in a pre-ES2019 environment, the finally(..) method would not exist,
    	and an error would occur.
    */

    // getSomeRecords() returns us a promise for some // data it will fetch
    var pr = getSomeRecords();
    // show the UI spinner while we get the data
    startSpinner();
    pr
    .then(renderRecords) // render if successful
    .catch(showError) // show an error if not
    .finally(hideSpinner) // always hide the spinner

    // A polyfill for finally(..) in pre-ES2019 environments could look like this:
    if (!Promise.prototype.finally) {
    	Promise.prototype.finally = function f(fn){
    		return this.then(
    			function t(v){
    				return Promise.resolve(fn())
    					.then(function t(){
    						return v;
    					});
    			},
    			function c(e){
    				return Promise.resolve(fn())
    					.then(function t()) {
    						throw e;
    					}
    			}
    		);
    	};
    }
    ```

  - Transpilation and polyfilling are two highly effective techniques for addressing that gap between code that uses the latest stable features in the language and the old environments a site or application needs to still support.

- HTML and CSS, by contrast, are forwards-compatible but not backwards-compatible.

## Interpretation

- The majority opinion seems to be that JS is an interpreted (scripting) language. But the truth is more complicated than that.
  - Languages regarded as “compiled” usually produce a portable (binary) representation of the program that is distributed for execution later. Since we don’t really observe that kind of model with JS (we distribute the source code, not the binary form), many claim that disqualifies JS from the category.
  - The real reason it matters to have a clear picture on whether JS is interpreted or compiled relates to the nature of how errors are handled.
  - JS source code is parsed before it is executed. It calls for “early errors” to be reported before the code starts executing and those errors cannot be recognized without the code having been parsed. But the JS “compilation” produces a binary byte code (of sorts), which is then handed to the “JS virtual machine” to execute.
  - JS is a compiled language. The reason that matters is, since JS is compiled, we are informed of static errors (such as malformed syntax) before our code is executed.

## Web Assembly (WASM)

Is a representation format more akin to Assembly (hence, its name) that can be processed by a JS engine by skipping the parsing/compilation that the JS engine normally does. The parsing/compilation of a WASM-targeted program happen ahead of time (AOT); what’s distributed is a binary-packed program ready for the JS engine to execute with very minimal processing.

- An initial motivation for WASM was clearly the potential performance improvements.
- If a language like Go supports threaded programming, but JS (the language) does not, WASM offers the potential for such a Go program to be converted to a form the JS engine can understand, without needing a threads feature in the JS language itself.
- WASM isn’t only for the web, and also isn’t JS and WASM it will not replace JS. WASM significantly augments what the web (including JS) can accomplish.

## Strict Mode

Strict mode shouldn’t be thought of as a restriction on what you can’t do, but rather as a guide to the best way to do things so that the JS engine has the best chance of optimizing and efficiently running the code.

- Most strict mode controls are in the form of early errors, meaning errors that aren’t strictly syntax errors but are still thrown at compile time (before the code is run). E.g. Strict mode disallows naming two function parameters the same, and results in an early error.
- `"use strict";`
- Can alternatively be turned on per-function scope, with exactly the same rules about its surroundings, but the only valid reason to use a per-function approach to strict mode is when you are converting an existing non-strict mode program file and need to make the changes little by little over time. Otherwise, it’s vastly better to simply turn strict mode on for the entire file/program.
  ```jsx
  function someOperations() {
    // whitespace and comments are fine here
    "use strict";
    // all this code will run in strict mode
  }
  ```
- ES6 modules assume strict mode, so all code in such files is automatically defaulted to strict mode.

## Defined

- JS is an implementation of the ECMAScript standard (version ES2019 as of this writing), which is guided by the TC39 committee and hosted by ECMA. It runs in browsers and other JS environments such as Node.js.
- JS is a multi-paradigm language, meaning the syntax and capabilities allow a developer to mix and match (and bend and reshape!) concepts from various major paradigms, such as procedural, object-oriented (OO/classes), and functional (FP).
- JS is a compiled language, meaning the tools (including the JS engine) process and verify a program (reporting any errors!) before it executes.

---
